---
title: Cornell in India
author: Jack Scodro
pubDate: March 23 2024
---

When asked about the benefits of Cornell College’s block plan, I answer by running through the same list. I am happy to explain that with one class at a time, you don’t run the risk of multiple tests on the same day or an unlucky flood of homework from multiple classes on the same day, giving you an unattainable workload for the night. I bring up the benefits of focusing on one single class at a time. With as few distractions as possible, each subject can be given the full attention it deserves. As I write this from my room in Jamkhed, India, I realize that I have a new point to add to my list - the block plan is perfect for studying abroad.

One immediate benefit jumps out right away - that the block plan ensures that one study abroad course doesn’t interfere with multiple standard courses. One free course slot can be filled with a study abroad course without interference in the rest of a student’s schedule. This is, in practice, just as helpful as in concept. As a senior in the English department, I have taken two capstone classes during this year, one within the first half of the year and the other in the second. This, in a standard school, would have made this trip virtually impossible; at Cornell College, it is no problem at all.

This course itself - POL 246: Gender and Development in India, taught by Aparna Thomas and David Yamanishi - has been life-changing, even though it is not half complete at the time of writing this. Our class has reached the town of Jamkhed in the Indian state of Maharashtra and are staying on the campus of the CRHP (Comprehensive Rural Health Project). Since arrival, we have been able to meet with and hear the stories of multiple women who have been prolific in bringing healthcare to their villages, which are some of the most impoverished villages in India. It is a profoundly impactful experience to meet with these women. Knowing that you are in the presence of someone who has saved innumerable lives, and who has brought health education to those who need it most, is the sort of experience which I anticipate none of us will ever let fade in memory.

This course is entirely unique, and I am certain that it cannot be replicated in any other place or with any other professor than Aparna Thomas. It is not unique, however, in its excitement - while I have not experienced them, I know from conversation that each and every course Cornell offers abroad is a completely one-of-a-kind, irreplicable experience and that those lucky enough to take these courses are grateful to have been able to experience such vibrant and unfamiliar places As diverse as our country is, its myriad of cultures is not always represented fully in rural Iowa, and for a school in such a location to be able to provide such first-hand exposure to cultures all across the world is something truly impressive. I speak for the entirety of our course in expressing our gratitude to professors Thomas and Yamanishi, as well as to the school, for providing this opportunity to us.
