---
title: '"King of the Hill" Mock Trial Tournament'
author: Jack Gross
pubDate: Nov 4, 2024
---

Get excited Rams\! This year Cornell is seeing the long awaited return of a mock trial tournament hosted on its very own hilltop. Many students may not know this, but Cornell used to host an annual mock trial invitational. However, it has been absent since 2010\. This year with the help of tournament directors, Celina Schertz and Kaden Legore (two returning mock trial members who made the A squad their very first year\!), the tournament is making its return as “King Of The Hill.” Block break three, students can see teams in suits on campus for rounds hosted in West Science Hall and Law Hall. Cornell will be hosting teams such as Columbia College and the University of Missouri, traveling from all over to make their way to the hilltop.

For those who don’t know how mock trial works, here’s a quick summary. In August—the start of the mock trial season— the American Mock Trial Association (AMTA) releases the case for the school year. This consists of a roughly 260-page document that contains everything for the case: sworn statements from all involved parties, all of the evidence gathered pertaining to the case and trial documents. Mock trial uses the Midlands Rules of Evidence (MRE) all of which are contained within documents that are made available to competing teams. The MRE is based on federal law. Mock trial involves quite a bit of reading in order to understand what is inadmissible in trial based on these governing rules of what is allowed or objectionable.

This year’s case is about the death of Avery Bancroft, a multi-millionaire (with emphasis on the multi) while he was on a train in Australia. Taylor Hopson, the child of the deceased, is accused of causing the death by their half sibling Shannon Shahid. Also onboard the train, there were a number of individuals who had reasonable means, motive, and opportunity to pull off the murder. These motives range widely. From Kirby Doolittle, Mr. Bancroft’s overworked personal assistant, to Dr. Hillary Edmund, put out of work by a vicious ad campaign funded by Mr. Bancroft, and Taylor Hopson, standing to gain 95% of Mr. Bancroft’s fortune upon his death (if they could manage to not be written out of the will first). With accusations flying and testimony conflicting, it is up to the teams to piece together a lineup of three out of the 10 available witnesses to bring out damning evidence against the opposing counsel's case. Each team in a round consists of six people, three attorneys and three witnesses. Some witnesses can only be called for the defense, while others can only be called by the Plaintiff or by either side.

If one is on the side of the Plaintiff, they are accusing Taylor Hopson of bringing about the death of their father in some way and they will try to argue that before the judges. There are two routes that the Plaintiff’s team can take. First, that Hopson poisoned Mr. Bancroft with rat poison that was found on the train. Second, that Hopson poisoned him with an overdose of potassium that, when paired with Avery Bancroft’s pre-existing medical conditions, proved lethal. This team can claim that Taylor Hopson worked in tandem with a partner or that they worked alone as long as they are able to back up their position. If one is on the Defendant’s side, they can bring forth an alternative theory trying to accuse someone else of the death, say that Mr. Bancroft died of a natural heart attack or otherwise advocate for Taylor Hopson’s innocence. There are quite a few defense theories that the team is able to run as nearly everyone on the train had reasons to want Mr. Bancroft dead. It is up to the teams to make sense of the 260 pages of relevant case information in order to craft their story and tell it clearly. It is always exciting to see the ways that different teams make sense of the same exact case documents.

Mock trial tournaments consist of four rounds, with each team playing both sides of the case two times. In a round, both teams introduce themselves to the judge and begin giving their opening statement. In an opening statement, a team lays out their story for what happened on the train and explains which witnesses they will call and what the witnesses will talk about. After opening statements, the Plaintiff begins their case in chief where they call their three witnesses one-by-one. The Plaintiff’s attorneys stand before the judge and ask questions of their side’s witnesses in order to craft and explain a clear and direct story to the jury. After each witness speaks, the Defense has a crossing attorney who will ask the witness questions to discredit the witness, point towards an alternative suspect, or bring out anything to challenge the Plaintiff’s theory. After the Plaintiff case in chief, the Defense gets a turn to call their own witnesses and tell their own story. At the end of the trial, both teams have a closer who steps forward and gives a closing argument. Closing attorneys have to be taking notes during trial to craft their close based on what facts came out in the trial.

Anyone who wishes to spectate the “King of the Hill” tournament, please feel free to reach out to the head coach, Max Handler, at [mhandler@cornellcollege.edu](mailto:mhandler@cornellcollege.edu). Rounds are open to spectators. Anyone who wishes to be present as a spectator is not allowed to wear anything identifying them as a Cornell student and must be quiet during the process of a round. There is no talking to other spectators during rounds and there is especially no talking to any of the competitors on either side, even during breaks.
