---
title: "Opinion: The Students United Will Never Be Defeated"
author: Rhye Nelson
pubDate: Nov 4, 2024
---

> The opinions expressed in this article are the author's own and do not reflect the view of The Cornellian or of Cornell College.

While student protests have occurred on campuses globally since as early as 1507, the United States’ rich history of student activism and protests started with widespread anti war protests around the 1930s and ramping up in the 1960s with the civil rights movement. Whether protesting academic management, dining hall food, the end to violence, or for equality, college and university students have been advocating for themselves backed by the first amendment rights of free speech and right to assembly.

While it is debated when the first Lunch Counter sit-ins started between the 1940s and 1960s, black college students led the first of the civil rights movement protests. These widespread sit-ins from Washington DC to the most well known being the 1960 Greensboro, North Carolina sit-ins at Woolworth’s, leading to the creation of the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) and Students for a Democratic Society (SDS). While SNCC dissolved in 1973, SDS had a revival in 2006 and is still operational today with over 40 US chapters regularly hosting student organized protests. These groups sparked a period of widespread protests during the 60s, 70s and 80s. After the McCarthy era of censorship, many of these groups were banned from campuses . This resulted in students at University of California, Berkeley, organizing rallies to demand their constitutional rights to protest. Nearly 800 students were arrested until the university adhered to the students’ demands of free speech paving the way for student protests around the United States.

In May, 1970, roughly 1 million students participated in protests, rallies, seminars, and strikes on almost 900 college campuses (not including many high school students who also participated in the protests). These protests were sparked by the escalation of the war in Vietnam, draft cards, the United States sending troops to Cambodia, and the arrest of Black Panther leader Bobby Seale. On May 4th, the National Guard shot 67 rounds in 13 seconds at the student protesters at Kent State University, killing four students (Allison Krause, 19, Jeffrey Miller, 20, and Sandra Scheuer, 20, who all died on the scene, while William Schroeder, 19, was pronounced dead later at a local hospital) and injuring nine other students. After the Kent State Massacre, protests spread to more than 1,300 campuses. On May 15th, local and state police shot at protesters on the Jackson State University campus, killing two students (Phillip Lafayette Gibbs, 21, and high school student James Earl Green, 17\) and wounding 15 more students.  

From the 1960s to 1980s, students nationwide stood in solidarity with the South African anti-apartheid movement demanding their institutions divest (or remove their financial backing) from US companies with ties to the oppression in South Africa, resulting in over 150 universities divesting. During these protests, students at Columbia University overtook Hamilton Hall and prevented the dean from leaving his office for 25 hours until the school met their demands. The students were met with over 1000 police raiding the building, arresting 700 students and brutally injuring over 100 protesters. Decades later, the calls for divestment continued and students blocked the entrance to an administrative building for almost a month. After the blockade ended in 1985, Columbia became the first Ivy League school to divest their roughly $39 million stocks of holdings in companies that supported South Africa. From the 1980s to 2010s, students from hundreds of campuses protested the drastic tuition increases leading to some schools lowering their tuition for lower income students. Additionally, during the US Invasion of the Middle East from the early 2000s, many students took to the streets in widespread protests.  

From 2013, Black Lives Matter protests rose around the country following the acquittal of George Zimmerman who shot a 17 year old black teenager, Trayvon Martin. The movement gained prominence once again after the murder of George Floyd in 2020\. Throughout the 2010s and 2020s, students have been taking to the streets and to their campus to advocate for racial equality and the end of police brutality, once again calling for the divestment of schools from private prison companies and local police.  

Following several months of US funded genocide of Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank and over 76 years of apartheid and occupation, students once again began protesting for an end to the genocide, the end to the apartheid, and their schools to divest. College students around the United States and globally set up over 121 encampments at over 117 universities. At Columbia, students once again occupied Hamilton Hall, renaming it Hind Hall in honor of a 6 year old Palestinian girl who was brutally murdered by the Israeli army after she called for medical assistance, surrounded by her massacred family. Many of these protests or encampments were forcibly disbanded by use of excessive police force, injuring and arresting hundreds of students nationwide. Now that school is back in session, students are continuing to use their voice to protest global injustices and advocate for equality—putting action behind their advocacy.  

Cornell College itself also has a long history of student protests on campus. On October 17, 1968, roughly 33 students took over Old Sem to protest racial inequality and to advocate for more courses on black history and culture. Reported on by _The Cornellian_, the students occupied Old Sem from 5:30am until 10am when police carrying night sticks arrived and the protesters were threatened to be removed with force. The takeover and additional student protests eventually led to the removal of Cornell College’s president Stumpf, in the 70s. Shortly after Stumpf was removed as president, Students for Black People (SFBP) was founded in 1973—eventually becoming BACO in 1986\. Silent vigils, boycotts, and marches have also been common in Cornell’s history including anti-war and civil rights protests during the 1960s.  

Despite continuous police resistance throughout time, college campuses continue to harbor advocates for equality and liberation locally and globally. Due to the diverse backgrounds and communities that college and university campuses offer, many students begin to exercise opportunities to advocate for the equality of those around them and around the world. As the media continues to portray protests in a negative light, it becomes increasingly apparent just how effective and important student movements are to the struggle for social justice nationally and internationally when we look back at the history of these protests. Together, students have a voice that can be heard and make real change from the campus to the global stage.
