---
title: "Suprise Suprise: AI is Destroying the Environment"
author: Rhye Nelson
pubDate: Dec 10, 2024
---

As the presence of generative artificial intelligence (AI) seems to invade most online spaces, both ethical and environmental concerns have been raised. Despite the benefits that may be present in the increasing prominence of AI, studies on the environmental impacts of AI generation cause increasing worries due to the lack of legislation or regulations attributed to the learning and development of AI tools.

A study cited by the United Nations in 2023 on GPT-3 water consumption discussed the data centers’ water withdrawal and consumption. Artificial intelligence often requires massive computer servers to compute outputs that are requested by users. These servers are mainly cooled through two different systems, a closed loop and an open loop. Closed loop systems cycle water to cool the servers and regulate their temperature. The water travels through a chiller and continues back to cool the servers again. This system does not withdraw or consume water outside of the initial withdrawal of water to cool the computers. However, a more efficient form of cooling these servers is an open loop system. Water is withdrawn from a local water source, chilled, and used to cool the computer servers. After regularting the computers' temperature, the water travels to a colling tower where some of the water evaporates during the release of heat. The remaining water can continue to cycle the systems for three to ten times before it needs to be discharged to avoid high concentrations of salt and minerals (“Making AI Less ‘Thirsty’: Uncovering and Addressing the Secret Water Footprint of AI Models” by Li, Yang, Islam, Ren). New potable (drinkable) water is added to avoid pipe clogs and bacterial growth. During the open loop cooling system, 80% of water is consumed by AI (withdrawn from local water sources and evaporated). Both cooling systems have a large carbon footprint. Simply training a model like GPT-3, Microsoft’s U.S. data centers can evaporate 700,000 liters of clean freshwater. With the introduction of GPT-4, the water consumption has only increased. The global AI thirst is expected to be accountable for 4.2-6.6 billion cubic meters of water withdrawn in the year of 2027 (United Nations Environment Programme). This estimate is roughly six times the amount of water consumed by Denmark, a country of 6 million people. While normal data and computer servers bring about environmental concerns, the water usage, electronic waste, and carbon footprint needed to pull and summarize data that AI uses is cause for concern.

While there continues to be little to no regulation on AI’s usage and the impacts of its water consumption, a bill has been introduced to the U.S. Senate to reduce the environmental impacts of AI ([S.3732 - Artificial Intelligence Environmental Impacts Act of 2024](https://www.congress.gov/bill/118th-congress/senate-bill/3732/text)). Additionally, several other countries in the European Union have introduced a few policies to reduce environmental impacts of AI. With so many governments more focused on how to use AI in their strategies—pursuing efficiency over sustainability— environmental impacts are often overlooked. As artificial intelligence continues to evolve and the number of users continue to grow to use AI in mundane circumstances, it is unlikely that the environmental impacts of AI will be limited without global legislation.

## Sources

* [United Nations Environment Programme - AI has an environmental problem. Here’s what the world can do about that.](https://www.unep.org/news-and-stories/story/ai-has-environmental-problem-heres-what-world-can-do-about)
* [arxiv - Making AI Less “Thirsty”: Uncovering and Addressing the Secret Water Footprint of AI Models](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.03271)
* [United States 118th Congress - S.3732 - Artifical Intelligence Environmental Impacts Act of 2024](https://www.congress.gov/bill/118th-congress/senate-bill/3732/text)
* [The Washington Post - A bottle of water per email: the hidden environmental costs of using AI chatbots](https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2024/09/18/energy-ai-use-electricity-water-data-centers/)
* [Tom's Hardware - Using GPT-4 to generate 100 words consumes up to 3 bottles of water — AI data centers also raise power and water bills for nearby residents](https://www.tomshardware.com/tech-industry/artificial-intelligence/using-gpt-4-to-generate-100-words-consumes-up-to-3-bottles-of-water-ai-data-centers-also-raise-power-and-water-bills-for-nearby-residents)
