---
title: Sustainability on Campus
author: Murray Page
pubDate: March 23 2024
---

Cornell College is taking many efforts to make the campus a more sustainable place, but in order for these efforts to be successful they need the help of their students and staff. There are many people who are tasked with keeping the campus as sustainable as possible. These people include David Smigo, General Manager of Bon Appetit Management Company at Cornell College, Cari Morgan, Cornell’s facilities service manager, Rhawn Denniston, the chair of Cornell’s sustainability task force, along with student run organizations like the environmental club, and many more people working behind the scenes. It is important for students to be informed of the work these faculty members are carrying out in order to know where help and new ideas are needed.

Cornell’s dining services, maintained by the on-site operation Bon Appetit Management Company, are taking many positive efforts to reduce their waste and greenhouse gas production. A big part of this is them sourcing their food in bulk from many local farms with almost 40% of their food coming from farms within 150 miles of campus. Buying this food in bulk allows for more parts of the product to be used, reducing food waste and the waste of plastic packaging. Buying locally also increases the shelf life of the food and reduces travel time therefore cutting vehicle emissions. Bon Appetit purchases “seconds” (produce that doesn’t look perfect but is still of good quality) from local farms. The dining operations use this food which helps out the farm, reduces plant loss, and keeps that produce from being thrown out. They are also working hard to be more plant forward, and use less beef and cheese as cows are a major contributor to methane which is a harmful greenhouse gas. Many efforts are made by Bon Appetit to use as much of the purchased product as possible. Bon Appetit composts their food waste through a program called “Waste Harmonics” as Cornell’s campus does not currently have their own composting system. Bon Appetit also has an arrangement in order to donate non viable food to those in need. They do this through the “Food Recovery Network”, a national program, and some food is donated directly through local centers. Smigo is also looking for volunteers to bring back the on campus food recovery network which would take food to community members and students with food insecurities. In order to hold themselves accountable, Bon Appetit measures the amount of compost they produce. The numbers given by Smigo confirms that more food waste comes off of students’ plates than from the kitchen with around 100 gallons of compost a day coming from students’ food waste and 50 gallons from kitchen waste.

This brings up the important issue of students being careless with what they throw out. Recently, Bon Appetit has tried to reduce this issue by using smaller plates and reusable takeout containers in the cafeteria along with bigger water bottles (therefore less plastic) in Zamora’s Market, but overall this issue will fall on the students. It is the responsibility of students to use a reusable water bottle, not take more food than they will eat, and know what is recyclable and carry that out. On campus, organizations are making an effort to educate students on these issues. An example of this is a food education week that will be put on by Bon Appetit March 25th - 29th that will include a sustainability task force meeting, open forums for students on Bon Appetit sustainability, and meetings with the Environmental Club. This week will be attended by the Bon Appetit Food Education Program Coordinator who will help lead opportunities for classroom interaction, a waste awareness campaign, and a visit to local Morning Glory Farms.

The Cornell College Sustainability Committee is a task force that is composed of students and staff members. In the past they have focused on doing educational campaigns about sustainability and recycling as well as advising Cornell in the prioritization and implementation of climate initiatives. It consists of members from the environmental studies program, student affairs, facilities, Bon Appetit, information technology, and custodial services.

The group was started several years ago but has not been consistently meeting for a while. David Smigo explained that the group will begin meeting more consistently as students express more of an interest.  There are also student groups on campus making an effort to keep Cornell accountable for their waste and emissions. One of these groups is the environmental club. A current goal of the environmental club is to be a space open for people to act on their feelings about environmentalism on campus and on a broader scale. They will be hosting a day of planting trees later in the semester as well as a multi-club hosted flea market for students and clubs to get rid of unwanted items in a more sustainable way. They will be announcing dates for these events and regular meetings soon. Email envioronmental@cornellcollege.edu if you are interested in finding and carrying out ways to make the campus more sustainable, and attending gatherings with other students who feel the same.

Cornell’s Facilities Services team is working hard to do their part in making Cornell a more sustainable campus. They are spreading recycling campus wide, and working on recycling and reusing bigger objects as well. They are having student workers digitizing campus records in order to have more online and less paper storage in the future. Building controls are also watched to make sure that buildings are operating their heating and cooling systems as effectively as possible to use the least amount of energy or gas.

Another component of sustainability of Cornell’s campus relies on small factors not seen by most being kept in perfect condition. In order to check on these factors the campus had an energy audit in the fall and winter of 2019. Because of this audit most of the buildings on campus had their lighting upgraded to LED lights in order to conserve energy. The old steam plants were also retired, and new hot water heaters were installed in some buildings. Now recycling bins are being placed in most rooms on campus to reduce the amount of waste going to landfills and campus facilities are working on installing water bottle fillers in more locations. In addition, this summer there was an internal storage infrastructure upgrade in Bon Appetit which reduces leaks and breaks in water flow decreasing unneeded water usage.

That being said, there are other projects needed on campus that would have a much bigger impact on emissions. For starters, the use of renewable energy is an extremely important part of sustainability. Everytime a new building project is put up on campus, solar panel installation is looked at to see if it would be the most effective form of energy. This type of renewable energy has not been used yet because of the laws surrounding using solar panels on a commercial level, but it is important that Cornell continues to look into this initiative. It would also be very effective for Cornell to establish a composting system. This could be done by creating a composting bin and paying for that to be composted by a service, or by reopening the on campus community garden which needs the help of students.

David Smigo of Bon Appetit is looking for students who are willing and excited to put forth the effort to make the campus more sustainable. This includes helping package leftover food for those in need, working in a community garden, or sharing more new ideas. For students with interest in a future in environmental education there there are job opportunities as a Bon Appetit fellow. The fellows travel from campus to campus educating students on sustainability. Contact David.Smigo@cafebonappetit.com if you are interested in being involved in any of the on-campus sustainability services involving Bon Appetit.

For any students who are interested in making a difference on campus, or who are concerned about the future climate of our planet, it is important to know that there are ways to help. There are people who are working on this issue, and there is a place for all students in it. Concerned students should talk to any of the people mentioned in this article, or to any campus faculty that can help point them towards the place they will be the most useful. Students and staff on Cornell’s campus must know the importance of mitigating climate change, and be consistently working towards taking care of their part of it.
