---
title: "Rude Awakening: Self-Proclaimed Sports Expert Gets Humbled"
author: "Aaron Fennell-Chametzky"
pubDate: "Oct 20 2021"
---

I don’t know how I’d describe myself in a social inhibition sense. On one hand, I’ve gone to school in a dress multiple times, have attended many events such as festivals, football games, and campaign rallies by myself, and did a survey in 6th grade about racism at my elementary school, which eventually led to a meeting with the superintendent of the district. TMI, I don’t care. On the other hand, I’ve never tried an illegal drug, I’ve never asked anyone out or attempted to flirt, and at many of those events I go to, I don’t speak to anyone besides people running whatever it is. So my most recent endeavor could be bizarre, or it could be seen as completely normal. I assumed it would be the latter.

Intramural sports were one of the things I was most excited about heading into college. My athletic career was short and strange. It included being the manager/14th man on a freshman basketball team, being a bench warmer for my school’s freshman and sophomore girls’ softball team (that’s a whole saga I don’t need to get into now- I was a confused teen; granted, more confused than most, but still a confused 15 year old), and joining bowling and track as a senior with little or no experience in either and no friends in either. Basketball has been my favorite for a long time, as you’ll see over the course of this year, and I’ve been itching to play competitively for a while now. Last year, of course, there was no organized basketball for plebs like me. I’m hoping it will happen sometime soon. All I need is a new pair of kicks, and I’ll be ready to ball. Unlike intramural flag football, which I signed up for immediately when I saw the table for registration.

My football background is nonexistent. I didn’t play football at any level, nor did I ever play casually with friends (imagine having enough friends to play a football game that’s not just 2 on 2 or 3 on 3- couldn’t be me). The only “experience” in my situation was some sort of flag football back in junior high PE, which translates into English as “none.” When I arrived at the Van Metre Field for my team’s game, which was set to be at 6:00, at 6:01, I looked around and knew the names of almost no one. There were 3 other people from my assigned 7-man team who showed up, and 2 of them happened to be other non-athletes. I learned that they did play football in their past, though, unlike me. We might have been the only non-Cornell-athletes, past or present, at the field. Certainly among our team, which was filled out when I got there. Our team had 9 players, so the two other scrawny white guys and I rotated in and out as the center on offense and the scrappy hustler on defense. Here are my top 5 takeaways from the game:

1. I forgot what most athletes our age like in a group setting. None of them asked me or the other scrubs our names or seemed to show any interest in us. I asked their names, and they responded, but then basically ignored us. I’m not complaining- they know each other, and I’m this weird outsider.
2. Running the ball is the way to go in intramural. My team was down at halftime, then we adjusted our attack to feature fewer deep throws and more barreling in by our fast dudes., and we ended up winning. Also playing with a half field makes it not as difficult to obtain first down.
3. There’s a hierarchy of athletes within intramural football. I overheard this sentiment expressed several times: “I can’t believe you lost to the baseball players” (about a different game that happened on the other side of the field). I don’t think my team had any baseball players, so we’ll be good.
4. What are some of these men’s routines? How do they get in this good shape? I like to consider myself OK physically-which is possibly just my inflated ego- but man, the athleticism of my teammates’ put me to shame. I’m not jealous but… OK I am.
5. My team needs to communicate better. Although we won, our lack of preparation showed in a few not-that-important-but-could-be-sneaky-important ways. The other teams, including the one we played, coordinated their outfits to all be one color and they all seemed to know each other’s names. Those are 2 things we could work on.

I enjoyed the experience, however surprising it was, and I’m looking forward to continuing this over the next few weeks. I’m not going to write about it though. This isn’t what most of my writing will be like; they won’t all be this focused on myself. Now you know something about the man behind the words. The words will get jucier. The narratives will get dicier.

Listen to my show on KRNL- Tune Tuesdays at 4:30 PM and Sport Saturdays at 11:05 AM: https://streaming.radio.co/s209f09ff1/listen
