---
title: Campus Housing
author: Jack Scodro
pubDate: March 31 2022
---
With the lottery process for next year’s on-campus student housing having begun, housing options on campus are fresh on the minds of Cornell’s student body, and the frequent stream of housing-related emails, which have done a fine job of informing us all of the various living situations available to next year’s returning students, have left some of us wondering what residency options have looked like in the past, and what they may look like in the future.

Cornell’s student population is set to continue to increase over the coming years, which has led the school’s Residence Life department to look into options for increasing the amount of accommodations available for students in the future. The natural place to look has been, unsurprisingly, at the campus-owned housing properties which are not currently in use due to the need for varying types of repairs. As it turns out, there are a number of buildings on campus which could be made ready to house students again in the future.

Director of Residence Life Daniel Chou informed us that last year, two properties in particular were on the shortlist for repairs when his department looked at which buildings should be worked on over the next few years. The 10th Avenue Apartments share J lot with Smith Hall, and not too long ago took on water damage when a local water pipe burst. The building, which when in use houses sixteen people, is split into two separate suites, each of which contain three singles, one double, and one triple. As the 10th Avenue Apartments offer one of the most straightforward and manageable roads to repair of all the residence buildings viable for a fixup, it jumped to the top of the list of possible restoration projects, right alongside Harlan House, which sits across the road from Russell Hall and lies close to parking lot M – a convenience which may be redundant for some future residents, as Harlan House boasts its own garage.

Harlan House likely climbed to the top of the ‘properties to be repaired’ list for its ability to provide a living space for a greater number of residents than most smaller housing options. As a fairly large house with both an attic and basement, it would be a great place for a student group to take up residence. In past years, it served as the permanent home of Cornell College’s femenist group, and would no doubt be more than capable of doing the same for any sizable student group in the future.

Unfortunately for any potential repair effort, Harlan House’s path to active service would be a good deal more difficult than one might wish it to be. The building, like the apartments on 10th Avenue, has taken water damage, but Harlan House faces unique obstacles that most water-damaged buildings do not. Like many other buildings on campus – Bowman-Carter or King Chapel, for instance – Harlan House isn’t particularly new. Herein lies two problems: for one, the building is largely constructed of wood, which takes a much greater toll from both water and time than many other building materials; for two, its older age could potentially designate Harlan House as a historical building, which would mean that any renovations performed to the property would need to be done with the town’s permission and cooperation throughout the entire process. Mount Vernon undoubtedly has, as Cornell College does, a great appreciation for the local history, and therefore, if Harlan House does have a designation as a historical building, an effort to prepare Harlan House for student residency would need to be a slower process in order to ensure that the property receives the care and delicacy that it deserves. The repair effort would be further lengthened by the attention required to address any structural issues related to the building’s age and internal damage.

All these factors being considered, despite its lower resident capacity, the 10th Avenue Apartments won out over Harlan House to be the next building to receive repairs. With the way work is expected to progress over the next months, Daniel told me that he thinks that the 10th Avenue Apartments are likely to be available for student housing for the 2023-2024 school year. So, students planning to participate in next year’s housing raffle shouldn’t be terribly shocked if they see an option for rooming at 10th Avenue Apartments. We anxiously await what the future has in store for on-campus housing, and are grateful for the transparency and openness of Daniel Chou in regards to our questions on Cornell’s residence life.
