---
title: Gender Diversity in Cornell’s E-Sports Program
author: Kira Short
pubDate: Nov 26 2023
---
Cornell College, historically, has been first to accommodate women’s careers and education. In 1858, Cornell student Mary Fellows was the first woman in Iowa to receive a bachelor’s degree, aided by the college’s progressive and accepting educational mission. On campus in 2023, this inclusive and welcoming environment for female students has persevered. The Cornell athletics program, for example, features nine men’s teams and nine women’s–notably filling the absence of women’s football and baseball with volleyball and softball teams. Clearly, women’s sports have not been neglected. Cornell’s esports program, however, cannot boast the same representation. Making up the 2022-23 roster were 30 men and 3 women, showing a 10:1 ratio. But is this a lack of thought and inclusivity on the part of Cornell’s esports staff, or a reflection of the culture present in gaming spaces at large?

According to varsity Rocket League player Madeline Jester, the latter seems to be the culprit. “For a cis woman to get into video games, you experience so much sexism and discrimination, like, immediately,” she shares. “It’s really off putting if you’re not already invested.” Before joining Cornell Esports, Jester coached youth Rocket League professionally and had amassed over 2,000 hours in the game itself, and as a trans woman, she has a unique perspective on sexism in gaming. “Oftentimes, Cornell College E-Sports Arena, Photo by Grace Anderson you’re transitioning after developing your interest in games. It’s like, if I’m experiencing misogyny, what am I gonna do—I’m not going to stop playing video games. This stuff is affecting 10 to 12 year olds who pick up a console, try out a game and are just…getting flamed because they sound like women in the voice chat.” In this instance, ‘getting flamed’ refers to the widely recorded phenomenon of chronic, sexist harassment against women in online gaming spaces, which includes name calling, threats of rape or death, and most egregiously, nonconsensual sharing of female user’s nude photographs and videos. The conclusions of countless studies show that somewhere between 60 to 70 percent of female gamers disguise their gender online, in effort to avoid harassment.

Cornell is barely behind its peers when it comes to female representation in Iowa esports, with 10 men for every woman on the varsity roster. When looking at Coe College and Grand View University to compare, both schools’ teams hold an estimated 6 men for every woman. Inclusivity is important to head esports coach Jack VonKampen, who has held his position since 2021. When interviewed, he revealed that his past coaching experience had all been with cis male players, but Cornell changed that. “Gaming is typically a male dominated space—but the fact that we have people that apply and are comfortable coming here that aren’t men…I think is kind of big for the program” said VonKampen. “Cornell is actually more diverse than you would expect for Iowa.”

This statement rings true when observing the gender demographics of Cornell’s esports teams. Though transgender people make up less than 5% of America’s population, and have an even smaller presence on Cornell’s campus, 3 trans women hold varsity status in the esports program, with League of Legends players Eliza Khan-Roberts and Rachel Spannbauer joining Madeline Jester. As a small school of approximately 1,000 undergraduates, Cornell has an underdog status in collegiate competition, but this makes the esports program’s impressive track record in tournaments all the more inspiring, according to VonKampen. “Our Rocket League team took a game off of Northwood Blue, the number one team in the country—which is unheard of, for a Division 3 school” he reports. Evidently, the esports community at Cornell has managed to excel beyond their means, both in national competition and as a shining example of gender diversity.

A great deal of progress still remains to be made for women’s representation in collegiate gaming. Though collegiate esports have come a long way in the last few years, today’s imbalanced gender ratios are still a far cry from equality. Collegiate esports rosters consist of multiple teams each competing in a different video game (the most common being Overwatch, League Of Legends, Rocket League, and Rainbow 6 Siege), and thus each woman who competes is likely to be the only female players on her prospective team. Combined, these circumstances create an isolating environment for girls looking to find community in competitive gaming.

In the professional sphere, steps have been made to remedy this problem. Overwatch’s Calling All Heroes program and Valorant’s Game Changers tournament circuit both cater specifically to women and those of marginalized genders who are looking to compete professionally and on the same level as their cis male peers. Translating this concept to work within college esports, however, feels impossible due to a lack of sufficient interest and funding. Jester comments: “If you want women to want to play in collegiate esports [...] you need to have women coming into college with thousands of hours of experience playing games. There need to be communities and cultures where they can get that experience without being constantly marginalized.”

As Cornell’s gender diversity climbs each year, there seems to be hope for more future female and nonbinary voices in the esports arena. For now, supporters can cheer on the women already there—and watch them play via Twitch and YouTube—as Cornell ramps up for another exciting season of gaming this fall.
