---
title: "New Provost Ilene Crawford Returns to the Hilltop"
author: "Tyson Williams"
pubDate: "Dec 14 2020"
---
Cornell College hired Ilene Crawford as Provost and Vice President for Academic and Student Affairs effective July 1 earlier this year. Provost Crawford returns to Mt. Vernon after graduating from Cornell in 1992 with a Bachelors of Special Studies in Classical Studies.

After an undergraduate career as a Ram, Crawford earned a Masters of Arts degree in English from the State University of New York at Binghamton and a PhD in English from the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. She completed the HERS Wellesley Institute for Women in Higher Education Administration in 2014. In 2010 and 2015, she was a Fulbright Fellow at the University of Education-Ho Chi Minh City and the university’s Institute for Educational Research. She comes to Cornell after nearly twenty years at Southern Connecticut State University in New Haven, CT, where she served as a professor for fifteen years before becoming Associate Vice President for Academic Affairs.

Cornell played a big role in preparing Crawford for the continued success she found all over the globe. She jumped at the chance to come back to the college that opened the door to so many possibilities for her. In an email interview, Crawford said, “I wouldn’t be who I am today without my Cornell experience. My Cornell faculty saw potential in me that I didn’t yet see in myself when I arrived on campus, and they invested a tremendous amount of time in me–both inside and outside of the classroom–to cultivate my abilities. I loved the block plan, and I missed it–even after so many years of being at institutions on a semester schedule! The opportunity to return to Cornell and make possible for other students the transformative undergraduate experience I was so lucky to experience is a dream come true.”

Crawford has noticed significant improvements that the college has made during her time away, especially the physical revamping of campus buildings. “Some of the most visible changes for me are the campus facilities: Russell Science is a fantastic, brand-new facility. Thomas Commons has had a beautiful renovation (although I am relieved the Orange Carpet is unchanged!) as has West, which used to have classrooms with walls that did not go all the way to the ceiling (not a great learning environment). The fine arts have moved down the hill to McWethy–another beautiful renovation–and Armstrong has a new theater. Rood House is now the Scott Alumni Center (I’m eager to see who now has my sophomore room as their office once I can get back in there!) and Olin is now co-ed (which is probably the best thing that could have happened to Olin).” 

Starting a new job and relocating halfway across the country is never easy. COVID-19 only complicated the process for Crawford, who reflected on her experience saying, “I don’t recommend buying and selling houses and moving long distances during a pandemic–that really takes a lot of the fun out of the experience! I couldn’t hug my family goodbye. That was so hard. And I’ve only seen them on FaceTime or Zoom since. Also very hard. It’s made me appreciate our family traditions all the more–and look forward to them next year. COVID-19 has meant no honeymoon as a new Provost. I started joining meetings from Connecticut in the spring, long before my July 1 start date, so I had a handle on campus planning and I could hit the ground running.”

Crawford has big, innovative goals and looks forward to bringing them to fruition in her new role while building on the success of her predecessors. “I’m excited about fully launching our new *Ingenuity* core curriculum. We’ve successfully implemented the First Year Seminar this fall and we are planning to implement the Sophomore Year Seminar in fall 2021–I’m even planning to co-teach a section of (Second-Year Seminar) with Professor Gruber-Miller. *Ingenuity* in Action is going to mean great experiential learning opportunities are possible for every Cornell student. And students’ *Ingenuity* ePortfolios will be such a powerful way for them to reflect on and make meaning of their Cornell experience and tell their Cornell story. My goal is for *Ingenuity* to define and showcase Cornell students’ accomplishments for a national audience–*Ingenuity* plus the block plan make Cornell very special.” 

Difficulties have inevitably surfaced when taking over as Provost is coupled with a raging public health crisis, but Crawford, much like Cornell College at large, has taken it all in stride. “Although I had the advantage of knowing Cornell from my student experience, stepping into a new job when it’s not possible to meet many people or work with them in person has certainly been challenging. Like our new freshmen and new transfer students, it’s been a challenge to build and sustain new relationships, and it is not always easy to lead discussions or work on projects when everyone is in a Zoom room. Our freshmen have done a terrific job of adapting to our temporary conditions, and I try to follow their example. I know I will get the chance to meet so many people ‘IRL’ in the months to come, and really look forward to all of the annual events that make the Cornell experience so special.”

Provost Crawford expressed her support for the revival of Cornell’s student-led newspaper organization, *The Cornellian*, and was gracious enough to participate in an interview for this article. If you are interested in getting involved with *The Cornellian*, please reach out to thecornellian@cornellcollege.edu to find out how you can join our podcast or write for our website.
