---
title: "Opinion: To My Puerto Rican People..."
author: Maria Alejandra Seda Morales
pubDate: Dec 11, 2024
---

> The opinions expressed in this article are the author's own and do not reflect the view of the Cornellian or of Cornell College.

> Maria is a Native Puertorriqueña.
<!-- I don't know what the best way to include this little bit of extra context would be... Especially since I'm (eventually) making authors a "tag"... ~Luna -->

Enthusiasm, hope, and change. Before the outcome of the 2024 election was announced, this is what many people walked around with and talked about. Enthusiasm for a different view, hope for a different world, and change from different leaders. The electoral college votes were in favor of the Republican Party on election night. With Arizona, Georgia, Michigan, Nevada, North Carolina, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin —including Iowa, which was expected to turn blue this year after the Des Moines Register poll in November— Donald Trump has won all of the “swing states” in this year’s election. Losing the swing states also made Kamala Harris lose the “blue wall” states. With 312 to 226 electoral college votes, Donald Trump is the President-elect of the United States, becoming the 47th president in his second term. *The day the world went silent.*

Puerto Rico also had its election day on November 5th. Normally, out of five parties —Popular Democrat Party (PPD), New Progressive Party (PNP), Independent Puerto Rico Party (PIP), Partido Dignidad and Victoria Ciudadana— the strongest and most viable parties historically are the PNP and the PPD. The PNP proposes Puerto Rican statehood, trying to convince the United States of America to turn them into the 51st state, ridding them of their status as a Freely Associated State (ELA), or Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. On the other hand, the PPD advocates maintaining the status quo as a Freely Associated State.

The ELA states that Puerto Rico is an incorporated territory of the United States, with a self-government system running the entire island. Under the laws of the United States, Puerto Rico’s citizens can only accept imported goods marked from the U.S., but Puerto Ricans are still not allowed to vote for the United States President.

In July, 2019, Ricardo Rosselló, the former governor and son of a former Puerto Rico governor, Pedro Rosselló, was forced out of his seat after twelve days of protest. Over half a million people rioted in front of the Capitol, sometimes violent. This happened after some hateful messages on a *Telegram* chat, that Ricardo Rosselló was part of, with his inner government circle, against women, the LQBTQIA+ community, Hurricane Maria victims, and native Puerto Ricans. These messages were discovered after two former officials of his office were arrested by the FBI for illegally investing $15.5 million in contracts favoring unqualified businesses to close associates, leaving Puerto Rico stuck with the “Great Debt” (owed to the United States).

This year, the elections took a turn, with the dominant political parties being the Independent (PIP) and New Progressive Party (PNP). The PIP –Juan Dalmau running for governor– received support from many public figures, including: Bad Bunny (who wrote “una velita” or “P FKN R”), Residente, Jowell & Randy, Kanny García, Fiel a la Vega, PJ sin Suela (who wrote “es la hora”), and other public figures. The support from so many public figures attracted a lot of people , especially the new generation of voters, leaving the PIP in second place of the most looked at parties this election. And, even though it was a strong campaign, offensive language was used by these public figures against the other parties,especially the PPD and PNP parties, calling them “corrupted people,” which played against the PIP, getting 33% of the votes.

On the contrary, Jenniffer González –who is the former commissioner resident for the U.S. House of Representatives under Ricardo Rosello’s government term, and now elected govenor, running for the PNPgot backlash from the people, after getting mad seeing her running for the seat after being involved in the Ricardo Rossello inner circle. She has also been resented for supporting Donald Trump, and trying to turn Puerto Rico into a state under Trump’s presidency. After postulating herself for governor, González was called “Jenniffer mentirosa” and “Jenniffer embustera” [Jenniffer liar] by Bad Bunny, and then by a lot of Puerto Ricans, turning into a trend. In the end, Puerto Ricans were left fearing for an Independent Puerto Rico, as we don’t have a support system, or a good Department of Education –after hundreds of schools were closed under Roselló’s government, and money was stolen or misused– no sustainable fabrics (food, clothes, etc.), no contract for imported goods other than America, and the “Great Debt.” Despite this, González received 39% of the votes, winning this year’s election.

And, what does Puerto Rico have to do with the United States of America’s elections, if we can’t vote? Well, that’s the thing. “They want a Puerto Rico without Puerto Ricans,” Puerto Ricans say. For the last couple of years (or at least since we “noticed”), Puerto Rico has been taken over by foreigners, outsiders and millionaires that take advantage of Act 22. This act offers wealthy foreigners with a high purpose of investment, with the opportunity of relocation once on the island. These foreigners are 100% exempt from Puerto Rico’s income taxes, after becoming a bona fide resident. The non-natives take pieces of the island that are public, mostly the coasts, and privatize them, not letting the very own natives walk around our “Islita,” not even the beaches, since they use their new properties as blockers for the coasts. But, still, we are not allowed to vote for the one that decides our fate every four years, because we are Puerto Ricans. With a Republican president on seat, of whom we already have past experience of his management –Puerto Ricans were thrown rolls of paper by this former president, and food resources on a storage place were hidden in Puerto Rico under Ricardo Rossello’s government– Puerto Rico is left in the uncertainty of what is going to happen.

Fear, loss and a loop. That’s what’s left for most of us, in the next four years. We are not immigrants. We are not here illegally. And, most of all, we are not garbage. We are here because we didn’t have a future to see in Puerto Rico. Because nobody invests in Puerto Rico. But, if Puerto Rico is sold, will the Puerto Ricans lose their citizenship? And if so, will the Puerto Ricans, including me, be getting thrown out of the United States or considered illegal? Are we going to lose our last hope of a well-deserved education? Of a well-deserved justice system?

*They want a Puerto Rico without Puerto Ricans.* But they don’t want Puerto Rico anywhere near them either. So, where am I supposed to go? Where are we supposed to go? To my Puerto Rican people, I only have this to say: *I’m sorry.*
