---
title: The Royal Purple Yearbook Returns
author: Eliza Carlson
pubDate: Dec 11, 2024
---
For the first time since 2014, the Royal Purple yearbook will return to Cornell at the end of this academic year! Students, faculty and staff participated in picture days at Zamora’s Lounge on Dec. 5th and 6th to get their headshots taken for the 2024 yearbook. The return of the Royal Purple is thanks to a hardworking group of students - co-founders Nick Schwartz ‘25 (Student Body President) and Veronica Schuchart ‘26 (Chair of Academic Affairs), Cameron Bennington ‘26 (President of Cornell’s Historical and Archeology Society, chief editor for the Royal Purple), and Oriana McKanan ‘26 (junior class editor for the Royal Purple) - who collaborated to bring the yearbook back after its ten-year absence.

The project was born when Schuchart approached Schwartz about the possibility of reviving the yearbook. Said Schwartz, “From that point, we gave the project the codename ‘Project Capture.’ We maintained secrecy because we did not want to over-promise that the yearbook would be returning. There were some significant hurdles we needed to address first before even exploring the possibility and further announcing the return.” These hurdles included questions about who could use the Royal Purple name and the college seal, how to create a yearbook and what costs would be, concerns over the use of student information due to FERPA regulations, and whether there would be any demand for a yearbook. Schuchart took lead on creative approach and marketing, while Schwartz began finding answers to these questions. “Fortunately, with my role as Student Body President and Veronica as Senate’s Chairperson of Academic Affairs, the connections to getting answers to these questions really greased the wheel. I felt as if they added some legitimacy to us Yearbook Picture Day by Eliza Carlson. pulling this off. After all, the yearbook has been gone for ten years, and there has not been any sign of revival up until now.”

The yearbook team expanded to include Bennington, who is the president of the Cornell Historical and Archeology Society and “[shared] with us some wisdom and expertise in the college’s history” as well as becoming chief editor, and McKanan, now junior class editor, who “always had a passion for [the] Royal Purple yearbook, and helped bring a functional approach to the yearbook team.”

Print copies of the yearbook will be available for order in Block 7 for students at around $35-$45 apiece. This price range may shift up or down depending on the length of the yearbook. Schwartz notes that “We [will] not profit from these yearbooks as that was never our goal, and the price students pay per copy is what it costs to actually produce.” As the yearbook team is not currently an official student organization, they do not have access to the student activity fee funding and instead have worked to make the yearbook as cost-attainable as possible without that access to funding.

For any further questions about the Royal Purple yearbook, please contact Student Senate at: student_senate@cornellcollege.edu.
