---
title: Transgender Athletics
author: Ranier Kahl
pubDate: March 31 2022
---
On March 3rd, Iowa state Governor, Kim Reynolds, signed a bill against transgender female atheletes. The bill passed a law that prohibits trans women from competing in women’s high school and college athletics. The law went into effect immediately. Similar laws are in place in 10 other states, all forcing female trans athletes to compete on male teams. These are in place for all K-12 teams, community college teams, and college teams associated with the NCAA and NAIA. These laws only apply to female trans athletes, allowing male trans athletes to continue competing alongside other male identifying athletes.

The passing of the law has been claimed as an act to maintain fairness and inclusivity in sports. Reynolds cited the natural physical advantages of people born with male bodies as her reasoning behind the law, misgendering trans athletes in her reasoning. According to Reynolds, it is unfair to female athletes to allow trans women to compete alongside them. Her goal with the bill is to protect female athletes’ success and ensure fair competition; however, there has been no conclusive evidence that a large disadvantage exists, specifically with high School and college level athletes. Opposers to the bill argue that the small fraction of trans athletes are not the competitive threat that supporters claim them to be.

In the transgender athlete debate, some have argued that a year of hormone therapy should be required for atheletes to compete. This therapy reduces testosterone in the body, which in effect reduces hemoglobin. This carries oxygen rich blood cells throughout the body and increases athletic endurance. Research shows that women were 10% slower after reduction in testosterone, which is also the average difference between male and female distance runners. Requiring hormone therapy would reduce some of the supposed inequalities between athletes; however, hormone therapy is not something accessible to all young trans students. Requiring it would likely unnecessarily remove many student athletes from competing.

Most states that have similar laws in place have faced many legal backlash due to these bills conflicting with federal laws. Last year, the Biden administration passed an executive order that recognizes transgender students under Title IX. This protects them from sex based discrimination in schools. Transgender rights are also protected by Title VII from the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Bills banning trans athletes from school sports conflict with Title VII and Title IX. In many states, lawsuits against school districts have begun demanding that transgender students rights be protected. This can be expected to occur in Iowa moving forward, as laws banning students from competing as their gender is a direct act of sex based discrimination protected by Title IX.

With the lack of research supporting the idea that trans athletes are at an advantage and the obvious discrimination, it becomes apparent that these laws are not about fairness. The law passed by Reynolds, and similar ones in other states, do not aim to protect female athletes. They aim to harm transgender atheletes. They force women to compete as men and disregards students’ gender identity. The law invalidates trans students and is likely to affect trans students’ mental health.

The bill passed by Reynolds is a direct act of discrimnation against trans athletes. Trans youth belong in Iowa and deserve to compete in sports as their gender. If you’d like to join the fight against this discriminatory and harmful law, please contact the Iowa state senator and representaives and voice your opposition to this bill harming trans youth.
