---
title: "Young Studs Amid Struggles"
author: "Aaron Fennell-Chametzky"
pubDate: "Dec 9 2021"
---
Going to the Rams’ home opener against the despised Kohawks on Monday night, I knew nothing about this team. If asked to name a player on the team, I’d be able to come up with two guys- one sophomore who lived on my floor last year and someone in my block 3 class that just finished. That’s it. I don’t know who the coach is, either. All I knew is that they had beaten Eureka College, a place I’ve never heard of, in a game I didn’t watch. This page so far makes it seem like I know nothing. I assure you that’s not the case. While I am more knowledgeable about the National Basketball Association than about basketball itself, I like to think that I know hoops.

The first thing that stood out to me after tip-off, sitting in the front row by myself (why the hell not? It’s open- no one said I couldn’t sit there!), was how difficult it was for the Rams to get the ball up the court due to Coe’s full-court press. Because simply getting into position to run plays took some effort, the offense early on for the Rams was not getting high-quality shots. After a technical foul on Cornell, for a reason I don’t know, they stopped taking bad threes for a while and attacked the basket. It didn’t matter because the Kohawks did it better. Their all-senior frontcourt of Sam Auen, Ray Thrapp, and Jared Kruse were unstoppable most of the game. Those 3 combined for 52 points and 20 rebounds. Although our center Logan Sharp has a significant height advantage at 6’9” to Kruse and Thrapp’s 6’4”, he wasn’t able to protect the rim. I’m not blaming the loss on him at all though. A lot of that belongs to the guard play. 

Within a minute of freshman Jayden Meeker entering the game, I was impressed by his effort. Maybe it’s because he’s young and isn’t jaded by the grind of Division III basketball- harder than high school but without the fame and glory of DI and even DII. On offense the first time he got the ball, Meeker drove into the paint, almost lost the ball, but was able to recover it and dish it behind the defender to Sharp for an easy bucket. Although later he had a 4-point play opportunity (he missed the free throw but oh well), defense is where he stood out throughout the game. When sometimes the Rams’ were doubling the ball handler too much, Meeker kept his focus on his main, and in some moments roved around like Giannis Antetokounmpo. He is kind of like a young Giannis in that he’s listed at 6’4”, 160 lbs. As a 5’11”, 140-pound guy who people think is skinny, I’m awed by how he- at only 20 pounds heavier _while _being 5 inches taller- seemed physically able to hang with a Kohawk frontline that is almost all guys 3 years older than him at that size. Incredible. Alright, enough gushing. Towards the end of the game, 7 footer Hart Gallentine finally entered for Cornell. With Coe’s tallest player who saw action being the 6’7” Max Lampe, I was perplexed as to why the big man was only out there in garbage time. Unless he’s just not a skilled basketball player, which I highly doubt given he’s a senior who’s been on the team for 4 years- how could one not become a decent player having 3 seasons of practicing with the team?- he should have played more. I should have asked coach Dave Schlabaugh why that didn’t happen.

In the third game of the season, at home against Wartburg, Meeker got more playing time, still off the bench, and showed why. After an OK first half – 4 points and 4 rebounds but only 1-4 from the field – he jumped out in the second, doing all he could on both ends for the Rams. Again, he was a terror on the defensive side of the court, with 3 blocks and 2 steals overall in the game. The difference I saw was his aggressiveness on offense. I don’t care that he shot 3-9 from the field. Since he comes off the bench, he often plays with Logan Christensen running the point- a good defensive pest who based on these two games seems more like a natural shooting guard- instead of Cleary/Magnani, who basically split it in the starting lineup. Christensen looked rushed in both games, and as I said earlier, he would be better playing off the ball. This means Meeker has to create his own shot, which is something that might get there eventually but at this early stage of his career doesn’t seem like his specialty. In that second half, though, we saw some help for Jayden off the bench and we got a taste of what could be an exciting tandem in fellow first-year Zach Ingle. Ingle, who played 0 minutes in the first half, played 10 after the break and absolutely lit it up to the tune of 16 points(!). His shot-making was a revelation. I hope he gets to play in future games. No, I don’t expect that Dion Waiters-esque hot hand every time he checks in. I do see a world in which he’s the leader in 3 point percentage and possibly 3 pointers made this season for the Rams.

So despite losing by 16 and 15 points in their first two games here in Mount Vernon, I feel good about this team. After a first-year class last year that didn’t really contribute, mostly due to them not playing very many minutes (to be fair, it was a wonky pandemic season), it’s awesome to see two first years be arguably the teams’ best players. Meeker and Ingle are just getting started. This duo will be the highlight of a season that has the chance to be one of not a lot of winning.
