---
title: "“Heated Rivalry” Review: The Importance of Representation"
author: Ren Solis-Roman
pubDate: Feb 10, 2026
---
Though the world has become a more accepting place than ever before, queer representation in the media still has to fight for normalcy. There have been important and impactful examples of queer representation in modern media; like “Heartstopper,” and characters like Casey in “Atypical.” Despite this, the inclusion of a queer character has become a checklist to meet minimum requirements in media. Products of this create cringey characters whose entire personalities consist of their queer identities and are used for comedy within media. This form of representation falls flat and reinforces a lack of depth for those in the queer community.

Recently, a release of a show called “Heated Rivalry” based on a book by Rachel Reid, gained immense popularity. It follows two hockey players named Ilya Rozanov and Shane Hollander. As implied in the name, they are rivals in the sport who have an unlikely relationship off the ice. Starting in their rookie year, the two start a sexual relationship whenever they are competing with each other. Though the show can be sexually graphic in the beginning, as it progresses, there are hints of affection beyond physical attraction. The story allows for each person to develop their own character development separate from their relationship. Their identities are not tied solely to being in a queer relationship. It is established that first and foremost, they are competitive athletes with impressive records and individual goals. This allows for Ilya and Shane to display their flaws which creates a more realistic world. This directly combats negative stereotypes that shows and movies typically fall into.

What makes “Heated Rivalry” especially productive is the lack of “outside conflicts” that strains a queer relationship. These kinds of conflicts can look like other characters forcing Ilya or Shane to come out or dramatised denial of sexuality for comedic relief (like being forced to date the opposite sex). The main focus is on the development of two individuals who are navigating their emotions for the other in a high stakes environment. Shane questions his sexuality and the show allows him to do this without villainizing his character for not understanding his sexuality. For Ilya, the show allows for there to be complexity behind his confidence. The audience gets to understand just how much Ilya has to lose through his family and home country (Russia).

What makes “Heated Rivalry” compelling is that neither characters’ identity is overshadowed by the relationship itself. Their rivalry establishes an equal footing, where their autonomy is kept in balance, and neither character compromises on their wants or needs. As their relationship evolves, so does the connection the viewer has to the storyline. The tension between secrecy and emotional vulnerability reflects the experience of many queer individuals in similar positions where secrecy is important. People who are in situations where secrecy is needed for safety against families or higher authorities can find comfort in the show. “Heated Rivalry” then becomes not just a representation of the queer community, but an accurate reflection of what many people go through.

Overall reactions have reflected how important it was to have a show that expresses what it means to be queer in this world. With how popular it is, more people can be exposed to a queer character who has depth, and isn’t used as comedic relief. Conversations of the toxicity gay men experience in “masculine fields” can bring support and acceptance. All together there is more room for empathy for gay men (and other queer identities) who are forced to hide for safety. “Heated Rivalry” creates an environment where the common experience of coming to terms with a person’s sexuality is represented without making it a laughing point to move another plot forward. This is what representation should be in media, not making a half-assed attempt at a shallow character to fit inclusivity standards.
