---
title: Knowing Your Rights in interactions with ICE
author: Adelaide Ries
pubDate: Feb 10, 2026
heroImage: "../../../images/articles/2026/know-your-rights-adelaide.jpg"
heroImageCaption: Know Your Rights Event at Mt. Vernon United Methodist Church
heroImageCredit: Adelaide Ries
---
On Sunday, January 18th, Cornell students and community members gathered at the United Methodist Church in Mount Vernon to learn about our rights when interacting with Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). Hosted by Voices United and the Iowa Migrant Movement for Justice (Iowa MMJ), the event had approximately 40 people attend with more participating virtually. About 12 of these attendees were Cornell students who came to represent our Third Wave Feminist Resource Group, Students for a Democratic Society chapter, and campus community.

A representative from the Iowa MMJ shared the following information about interacting with ICE and knowing your rights. It should also be noted that the following information is not official legal advice and should not be interpreted as such.

**When interacting with ICE**, remain calm and polite. Engage with them in a way that keeps yourself safe. Assess the situation. Remember that just because you may possess a right does not mean you must exercise it. In Iowa, you have the right to film or photograph ICE officers in public so long as you are not interfering with them. When recording audio, however, make sure your recording device is visible so as to not violate Iowa’s eavesdropping laws. It is important to note thatunless you are being detained, you are free to leave at any time. ICE officers may confront you if they have reasonable suspicion that you have or are in the process of committing a crime. Note that ICE has been using features like a person’s skin color, accent, and physical location to assume reasonable suspicion.

**Under the 4th Amendment**, you have the right against unreasonable search and seizure of your home. Unless ICE has a valid search warrant signed by a legitimate judge, you do not have to let them enter. A proper warrant should include a valid address of the home they intend to search. It is possible that ICE may have an administrative warrant, which allows them to detain an individual; an administrative warrant does not give ICE officers the right into your home without your permission. These warrants are issued by the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) and Department of Homeland Security rather than a court, and they are signed by immigration officers. When inspecting the warrant, have the ICE officers slide it under the door or hold it up against a window. Do not open the door. You also reserve the right to deny ICE officers access to your phone and other personal devices. They may use Face ID or fingerprint ID to unlock your devices, so consider using a secure password or code.

**Under the 5th Amendment**, you have the right to remain silent. Do not speak or sign anything without a lawyer present. ICE officers may use your verbal or written word to incriminate you. Officers may attempt to antagonize you by asking you accusatory questions. Refrain from defending yourself, and invoke your right by telling the officer, “I have the right to remain silent.”

**Under the 6th Amendment**, you have the right to an attorney if you are arrested or detained. The immigration courts will not provide you with an attorney, but you can still seek one out yourself. If you are not able to hire an attorney yourself, you can ask ICE officers for a list of nonprofit organizations that can provide legal representation at little to no cost. You have the right to that information.

**To prepare for police arrests or ICE detentions**, carry a document that shows your immigration status (if you have them) at all times. Keep copies of this document in a safe place accessible to someone you trust. Develop a family preparedness plan, so that if you are detained, there are steps in place to continue providing stability for your loved ones. Memorize the phone number of someone you can call if you are arrested. You have the right to make a phone call; however, it is not always possible for this right to be honored immediately following an arrest. Know that you may have to wait hours, days, or even weeks to exercise that right. Also note the existence of expedited removal, a process that allows ICE officers to deport non-citizens from the United States without providing them the normal due process rights usually afforded to individuals through immigration court. This may also impact a person’s ability to contact others via a phone call.

In regards to Cornell students and members of our campus community, the same rights and recommendations apply. In an email President Brand sent out last January, he wrote, “We would not allow ICE officers or agents to enter a private space—either to question someone or seek to take a person with that ICE official--without a legally valid judicially authorized warrant.” He also clarified that private spaces include all residence halls and residences, restrooms, offices, and classrooms, as well as Allee Chapel.

In addition to information about changing asylum and refugee policy, the Iowa MMJ representative shared the following updates regarding birthright citizenship, naturalization, and the status of ALL Iowa.

**Regarding birthright citizenship**, in January 2025, U.S. President Donald Trump issued an executive order ending birthright citizenship for children born from non-citizens or parents here on temporary status. This executive order is not yet being enforced, as it is currently being reviewed by the Supreme Court. If the Supreme Court rules in Trump’s favor, children born to an asylum seeker, refugee, green card holder, or other immigrant visa holders would still be U.S. citizens under birthright citizenship.

**Regarding the naturalization process**, one must be a lawful permanent resident of the United States for 5 years and must be physically present in the U.S. for 30 of those months. Another criteria is that the individual must have “good moral character.” As of August 2025, the USCIS determines good moral character on grounds of community service, involvement in religious activities, and positive information gathered in interviews within one’s neighborhood. Under the Trump administration, the naturalization process is currently paused.

**ALL Iowa** is a statewide collaboration that provides and facilitates free legal services for Afghan and Ukrainian immigrants in the state of Iowa. Their services will be concluding at the end of September 2026, as their grant was not renewed for a 5th year. If you are interested in learning more about these top ics, Students for a Democratic Society are planning to host their second rally on Wednesday, February 18th. The rally will focus on human rights violations and ICE’s attacks on U.S. citizens and non-citizens alike. More information will be available closer to the event.
