---
title: New Student Organizations
author: Chrysalis Goring
pubDate: Feb 10, 2026
---

> Notice: We're still working on getting images into this version of the article! For images, please see the physical edition for now. Thank you for your patience! ~The Cornellian

This year, several student organizations have been revived or refreshed, offering promising opportunities and new experiences for Cornellians. I was appointed the general director of Student Theater Council at the beginning of this school year, and it’s been an exciting and daunting experience to try and bring a club back from the brink of death. I noticed several clubs going through a similar experience this year, so I interviewed Third Wave Feminist Group (TWRG), Alliance, Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), Morgan’s Message, Cornell College Cooking Club (The 4C), and Student Theater Council (STC).

TWRG did exist at Cornell, but ceased to be an official student organization until it was revived in early 2025. A few passionate students and the many interested members who got involved were able to create a Living and Learning Community (LLC), dedicated to providing a safe space for students, including in times of emergency. Camille Diaz, a TWRG representative, said that she was inspired to start the club while in a class with the two co-presidents, Abby Girman and Hannah Koenighain. “There was a lot of talking about how we just constantly feel under threat, especially in terms of women’s rights,” Camille told me. So far, amongst other accomplishments, they’ve helped get Natalia’s Pantry underway (which many other clubs and individuals got involved
in!); provided free, high-quality reusable menstrual products to students; and hosted a Halloween event called ‘Bloody Mess.’ “We have a menstrual care product event where they have a period cramps simulator on campus and it’s those little things that get people, who may be born male and don’t understand what that experience is like for women, which… creates a bridge of understanding.” When asking Camille what she is proud of accomplishing/what effect she sees this club make, she answered that, “All of our events, I think, have touched people in incredible ways, and also to make the more ‘uncomfortable conversations’ more normal, which, you know, is how we create change.” The revival process of TWRG was a bit different than it may be for most. Many different administrative staff and residential life needed to be contacted in order to make the LLC happen, especially to get it up and running as a housing option for the 2025-2026 school year. Additionally, Camille shared that even the verbiage that TWRG uses as a student organization has to be carefully chosen due to our current political administration and the changing laws around women’s rights and reproductive care.

Other clubs have struggled less with technical hoops and more with attendance & involvement. Alliance, a group that is open to all, but exists in support of queerness and queer rights, has had a large e-board turnover this year and hopes to take the club in a new direction. Terry Hanson, the current co-president of Alliance shared his journey. “Originally I wanted to get involved because there was an opening, a treasurer opening and I was like ‘Oh, I bet it’s going to be difficult to get on e-boards here in college,’ which I later found out is not hard.” For new students, all of the clubs I interviewed are run by kind and welcoming people who have many roles available and are always happy to have organizational help. If you want to get involved with a pre-existing club, Terry is right—it’s not hard.

In regards to Alliance’s future, Terry shared “I would like this club to be more active… it seems like it has a bad reputation from before when we were here. At one point, it might have excluded people, which is not the point of the club. I would like it to be a safe space, especially in times like this, where people are fearing for what the future holds, it’s always good to be surrounded by those who share similar experiences. And, I think we have the opportunity to educate people, and to show that we are still here, and that people in the community--or not in the community—find a place that is safe for them.”

Students for a Democratic Society, technically a chapter of a larger national organization, got approved in fall of 2025, but began holding events for political involvement last school year. Nick Alderman, the student who first pitched bring a chapter to campus, was also inspired by a class he took. “In one of my classes, we had to do a project where we went through Project 2025… and through that research and then hearing my classmates’ presentations about it, I realized this was not the first Trump administration… and I realized that if we didn’t start organizing ourselves, that we weren’t gonna have a country left, you know? So I started looking at…all the different groups, right, and I settled on SDS because it was a student group. It’s just students, and it is students, like, standing up for what’s right, standing up for human rights.” At the time of the interview, Nick Alderman, Quin Jeffares-Whitehead, Orion Pevehouse, and Yonis Said all expressed that they started out with hesitation and a feeling of hopelessness before joining SDS. There was a sense—amongst even these very politically active students—of wanting to ignore what felt incredibly scary and overwhelming, and not even knowing where to start when it comes to organizing politically. However, after meeting with a common desire to find a way to make change, SDS worked with Indivisible Wabash Valley, the Mount Vernon community, and Cornell College to organize. Even before becoming an officially recognized student organization, they protested, brought Angel Ramirez (Iowa’s first Latina lawmaker in the House of Representatives) to campus, held a SLAM poetry event hosting excellent local politically active poets, and registered students to vote resulting in a record voter turnout in the most recent mayoral election.

Morgan’s Message is another club that is actually a chapter of a wider organization. I met with Brianna Risley, who was also inspired by a class she took. One of her assignments was to research organizations that help with athletes mental health, which is how she found out about Morgan’s Message. This organization is dedicated to the memory of Morgan Rodgers, and aims to help struggling athletes with mental health support. Brianna sympathized with Morgan’s story as a female athlete interested in psychology and supporting fellow students. She became an ambassador of Morgan’s Message, which can be done through their website, before deciding to bring a chapter to Cornell. The club focuses mainly on dedication games, during which they speak about the club’s message and have nine seconds of silence in remembrance, and offer the club as a resource to athletes and students attending the game who may not know about it. Brianna got started by getting 100 signatures from the student body to show that there was interest in the club and students saw a potential benefit to its existence at Cornell. To get a club approved, a potential club representative must prior present to Student Senate, which essentially means presenting the club’s purpose and answering any questions that senators may have. The following week, the club is voted on and either approved or denied, and presented at Student Senate. All in all it took a few months to get off the ground-but it’s been in full swing ever since.

Cornell College Cooking Club was started from a shared love for food and quickly evolved into a club dedicated to spreading the enjoyment of cooking and eating to the Cornell community. The 4C celebrates culture, community, and creativity through cooking. The motto they have been following is, “We serve, and we ate.” They meet to create small dishes that reflect personal and cultural traditions that give members a chance to share food from their childhoods and cultures with others. So far, the organization has hosted a Taco Bar and a Pancake bar that served over 50 people. They’ve been able to utilize donations of pots and pans from Student Senate to provide food to the Cornell community and create what they hope is “a lasting space where students can share their culture through food, learn from one another, and cook together for years to come.”

Some clubs build up a bit slower. Student Theater Council had a slow start, but they recently hosted the artistic director of Second City for an improv workshop, and the Duelling Dames for a stage combat workshop, with more events to come soon.

Even before becoming officially recognized by Student Senate, a new club can still meet and achieve a lot. Funding is one of the biggest struggles many clubs face, especially groups like TWRG who provide expensive (but safe and necessary) menstrual products free of charge, so getting official status helps a lot to gain funding.

If you’d like to start or revive a club of your own, reach out to senate_organizations@cornellcollege.edu for more information on getting started. If you’d like to be involved in any pre-existing clubs, the email is almost always the acronym followed by @cornellcollege.edu, or you can just ask around! Moral of the story—while all clubs have their struggles, great things can be achieved when Cornellians work together.
