---
title: Misogyny in Stem
author: Kylie Berry
pubDate: Nov 26 2023
---

Despite sex discrimination being illegal for over 50 years, women nation-wide have either been pushed out of or forced to make space for themselves in traditionally male majors, such as ones that fall under STEM.

Unlike property-owning white men, women were not always guaranteed access to higher education. Patsy Parker–a Professor and Associate Dean at Southwestern Oklahoma State University who has a ph.D. in Adult and Higher Education–in “The Historical Role of Women in Higher Education,” states coed colleges such as Oberlin College were an option in the nineteenth century for women, but even at colleges, their domestic duties were prioritized above their education. In 1837, Oberlin even had a policy that dismissed women on Mondays so they could do the male students’ laundry. According to Dee Ann Rexroat in “Pioneering women: The top moments in women’s history at Cornell College,” from Cornell’s newscenter, Cornell College was the first coed college in Iowa, with the first female graduate west of the Mississippi. Yet, as shown with Oberlin, coeducation does not automatically mean gender equality, and while Cornell College was ahead of its time, there is still work to do on campus combating sexism.

As time passed, coed universities became more common and less oppressive to women, but barriers such as admittance quotas that limited the amount of women accepted into universities still persisted into the 1970s. This historical gap between men and women's access to education resulted in a gendered difference between majors, and consequently, work fields.

> “The gender wage gap between men and women in STEM fields has caused woman to make around 23% less than men.”

Though the national demand for STEM majors has increased dramatically since 2016, women still only remain 28% of the workforce in 2023. This is in part because while women today are allowed to partake in STEM fields and careers, they are still traditionally male spaces. Even if classrooms have a similar ratio of women to men, women who are in the STEM field are subject to more sexual violence than other majors. This means the problem is not just the amount of women in these spaces, but the spaces themselves too. To make matters worse, the University of California San Diego in “Women in STEM Workforce Index 2020,” stated the gender wage gap between men and women in STEM fields has caused women to make around 23% less than men. This is not only because of the undervaluing of women’s work, but because women are less likely to be in high-paying jobs in STEM than their male counterparts. All of these factors contribute to the discouragement of women in higher education to pursue majors in STEM, which in turn amplifies the lack of women in the workforce.

Here at Cornell College, many women and nonbinary individuals pursuing or in a career in STEM feel the same way. After conducting a survey at Cornell College with a handful of participants that focuses on STEM students’ and faculties’ experiences with misogyny, I found that 75% of respondents stated they have felt threatened or unsafe by men in their field, infantilized or belittled by men, the need to prove themselves to men for basic respect, and having been interrupted or talked over by men in their field. 25% have also reported being sexually harassed or verbally harassed by men in STEM. A faculty member who wishes to remain anonymous told her many experiences with misogyny in her STEM field. She shared stories such as: “A former boss once sent me an article on how women who wore makeup at work made more money after we’d discussed a raise. When I told him I didn’t appreciate suggestions about my appearance he told me I always looked tired and that that was depressing. Then he told me it was ‘just a joke’.” They were also demoted to a lesser paying, easier job while working in management at a call center after becoming a mother because their supervisor did not believe they were qualified for their own job after having a child. While these are just two of many examples they provided, many women in the STEM workforce nationally undergo the same sexist treatment.

Moving forward, it is important to recognize there is not a clear, simple method to combatting this problem at Cornell College. However, if we focus on unlearning these biases, creating safe spaces for women in STEM, and educating and spreading awareness about this issue, we as a college community might see a decrease in misogynistic behavior in not just STEM, but also in the workforce overall.
