---
title: Perfectionism
author: Kimberly Maitland
pubDate: March 31 2022
---

Creativity is boundless, effortless for some, and experiencing the end results of a creative project can move us in many ways. Creativity provides human beings with outlets of expression that help to release built-up emotional distress and tension that arises as a result of life’s many hardships. It is beautiful. We appreciate it. And those of us who have a particular inclination to the act of constructing especially value the therapeutic elements that arise from creating different things. Arguably, it can be said that there is more joy and satisfaction that can be gained by both providing and consuming creative works. Engaging in the dualistic nature of both of these actions allows you to gain the cathartic release of working on creative projects; while enjoying the creative mind of another.

However, regardless of the compounded effect of enjoying the pursuits of both consuming and creating, it is much easier to witness creativity than to create it. It’s easier to sit and watch a time-lapse painting video than a minute of setting up your painting materials to actually do a painting yourself. And it isn’t because you don’t want to paint it, but it is because, for some reason, it temporarily feels better to just watch it than to actually do it.

You see, it is because doing it takes more than a morsel of effort. Completing these paintings - or actively creating a creative thing -  takes conscious effort, concentration, and time. If you struggle with perfectionism it takes even more of this concentrated time and focus. It is painstaking - and although enjoyable - it still can feel like a strenuous task that needs to be done. Like a hybrid version of the work that you put on a todo list, it is something you want to do, and - as a creative person - it is something you need to do, but sometimes it just feels like an added responsibility that compounds to life’s many demands. In this way, it seems to add to an experience of mental overexertion that repels you from creating things that give your life purpose. More dangerously, the fact that you can collapse all these needs into an annoyance; the feelings that you simply summarize with the phrase, “I can’t be bothered.”

You can’t be bothered. You can’t be bothered to finish the drawing you started two years ago, you can’t be bothered to work on that video, and you can’t be bothered to continue that personal project you had planned rich ideas for. And why should you? You have so many other important things that you should be worrying about. Assignments undone, clubs and events you need to plan, and graduation crawling around the corner. What will happen then? What will you do?

Despite all these present pressing matters - that certainly have their own valid concerns - why is it that the creative project is all you can think about. Perhaps you really do want to finish it, but the sensitive and high-strung perfectionist in you does not want to complete it. They don’t want you to because they’re scared that it will end up looking bad. You have already made some major mistakes in your draft, but alas the adventurer is also present in you. They are the true creative and they don’t really care. They just want to do something to finish something. Even though it looks a little crappy. They are proud to assert themselves in the fact that it is complete. They understand that the strenuous burden of incompleteness is a heavy one, and the only way to be liberated is to end it and move on to another project. Your vision is now guilt-free.

And perhaps this is the answer to at least one of the artist’s procrastination problems. You have to allow yourself to create “bad art”. It’s okay. You will only ever improve. The key is never perfection, but instead persistence. The act of continuing is enough to build your muscle memory so that you will eventually improve. After all, the phrase, “practice makes perfect” was always a lie. The truth is really, “practice makes progress”. And through this progression, you will find your voice and it will be heard most clearly in your art.
