---
title: What is Happening to Cornell's Community?
author: Jackson Manwaring-Perks
pubDate: March 31 2022
---
In 2018, I drove into Mount Vernon to start my first year at Cornell College. What became apparent to me then and to anyone who comes to Cornell was how small and isolated it was. Mount Vernon’s main street had a couple of small shops, some restaurants, a few bars, and not much else. It only took around 7 minutes to walk from one end of Cornell’s campus to the other and there was little to nothing else unless you wanted to make the thirty-minute drive to Iowa City or Cedar Rapids. Coming from a big city, that isolation worried me when coming to Cornell but those worries subsided as the days went by. What sold me on this small town and this small college was its community. Four years later, I worry that we are losing that community and our culture.

There is often something told to people who go to college and it goes something like this, “You should go to college not just for the education but for the experience.” As the cost of college rises, the value of your education and the experience becomes more important. We expect to make memories that will last a lifetime, make lifelong friends, and find a community to call home. Meeting these expectations should be important to Cornell if they want students to come to a small town like Mount Vernon. Cornell agrees this is important because when you look at their website, they make a promise to their students that you will “build relationships and find community”. It is this promise that I want to keep in mind as we examine the past couple of years.

To look at the past couple of years, we have to acknowledge the elephant in the room, COVID. During the spring break in the 2019-20 academic year, COVID spread across the United States and Cornell moved to online classes. Every class, team, and organization was suddenly forced online and had no idea what was going to happen. We were all left in limbo as the year ended, not knowing how the next year was going to work. It is important to remember that first-years were denied a normal end to the year, high school seniors were denied closure on their high school experience, and as we went into the next year we had to adjust to the strange experience of online classes while living on campus. The 2020-21 academic year was nowhere near normal and this is where our problems begin. Many student organizations couldn’t survive in the new online world, it was harder to socialize with other students, and class participation was down (It should be noted that the restrictions placed on students and faculty were necessary for the health and safety of our student body). Now, a year later, we are mostly back in person and no longer under many of the restrictions but it doesn’t appear that things have improved.

Let’s first acknowledge the issue of engagement in the classroom. Over the past couple of academic years, there has been a notable decline in engagement across campus. Online classes made it difficult for students to be engaged in class as the format makes it difficult to have discussions and many are left disengaged by Zoom fatigue. When we mostly transitioned back to in-person classes this year, there was an expectation that engagement would go back up, but it seems that isn’t the case. In faculty meetings this year, professors have discussed how there is notably low engagement in classes and a surprising attendance issue. Some classes have days where only half the class shows up or sometimes even less. This is not a problem exclusive to Cornell students but something happening nationwide. According to the EdWeek Research Center, around half of the students surveyed in 2021 reported that their morale and motivation were lower than in previous years. The effects of COVID on our student body clearly will have long-lasting effects even when we get off Zoom and back in the classroom.

Outside the classroom, we have also lost interest in our campus life. Extracurricular activities are one of the key ways a college student can find a community. The issue is that COVID caused many extracurricular activities to become defunct. Since COVID struck Cornell in 2020, we have lost 12 student organizations out of 44 and only 4 have been created this academic year. Greek groups, which account for around a fifth of the student population and play a key role in our community, have also taken a downturn as over COVID 4 groups ceased to exist and attempts at reviving old groups have not succeeded yet. On top of the loss of groups and organizations, recruiting has also been a problem for certain groups leading members to question whether their organization will join that list of defunct groups. Even our own Student Senate has struggled to maintain a full Senate since COVID. These trends show a concerning pattern with our campus life. The more groups we lose, the fewer ways we have of building communities.

The answer to “What is Happening to Cornell’s Community?” is quite simple, COVID. COVID has changed all our lives in so many ways and even in ways that may not be apparent. We don’t have the same drive we used to and it does show as we look at our campus and the trends that have occurred since 2020. Currently, we are losing the promise that students will “build relationships and find community” here at Cornell. If Cornell wants to keep their promise, we need to ask how can we get students engaged in and out of the classroom? I wish there was a clear answer but there isn’t and that is what worries me.
