---
title: Esports Roundup
author: Austin Palm
pubDate: Nov 19, 2025
---
As Cornell entered a new academic year, Cornell’s Esports program morphed, adapted, and improved as circumstances both foreseen and otherwise have come its way. At the beginning of the year, the Head Coach and Director, Jack Von Kampen, retired from Cornell. In the absence of a head coach, the new Student Director, Helen Carhill, has shouldered many of the responsibilities and needs of Cornell Esports. In a brief conversation, Carhill illuminated some of the difficulties that some teams endured last year, along with new challenges.

As the previous season ended last May, Carhill received feedback from players on various teams regarding the conference in which they participated. The National Esports Collegiate Conferences (NECC) as well as the Midwest Esports Conference (MEC) both had issues with moderation from conference officials, the division placement of our teams, and attitudes of other players. Former director Von Kampen had been a board member in the MEC, and with his departure, the program ceased participation in the conference. Despite past problems, nearly all of Cornell’s Esports teams are playing in the NECC once again this year. According to Carhill, the officials of the conference have made great improvements in how they manage matches, as well as place teams in proper divisions. The only team not participating in the NECC is Rainbow Six: Siege (R6), who are currently competing in the Midwest R6 league due to the issues with administration and placement mentioned above. Carhill stressed the value of these changes, that by placing our teams against opponents of the proper skill level, matches become better environments for improvement, and become more fun for the players.

Additionally, four teams are participating in a second conference: Midwest Valley Esports Conference (MVEC). During the first semester, the Valorant and Rocket League teams played in two leagues simultaneously on their way to an in-person tournament hosted by Wartburg College. The Valorant team went undefeated throughout their entire MVEC season, and took home a 2nd place finish in their tournament. Rocket League also finished the tournament in 2nd place, only defeated by St. Ambrose University in the Grand Finals. Next semester, the Smash Bros. and Overwatch teams will fight their way towards live tournaments of their own, which will take place on March 28 and 29. The tournaments will be streamed live, so follow Cornell Esports on X, formerly known as Twitter (@CornellEsports) and on Twitch (cornellesports) to find out when you can watch them compete!
