---
title: Experiencing the World of Culture at Cornell
author: Clara Biela
pubDate: Apr 26, 2025
---

Earlier this semester, Cornell’s International Student Association (ISA) hosted their annual culture show. Every year, the ISA invites Cornell’s international students to share cultural art from their home country, bringing students from all over the country and world together in harmonious union. This year was no different. From traditional Latin dances, like the Jz Zarate’s (‘28) Salsa, and the story of the jingle dress and its dance from her native tribe shown by Indigo Webster (‘28), to songs sung in other languages, including a Turkish Ballad sung by Elif Degirmenci (‘26) and Nella Sadirova’s (‘28) Kazakh lullaby, students were able to bring a piece of their world to the Kimmel Theatre stage. The night was led by MCs Michael Ossai (‘26) and Rodion Buhai (‘28), whose positivity and fun dynamic created an energetic and open atmosphere. Not only were Cornell students involved, but the ISA partnered with Coe College’s international student organization. Though we may be rivals in athletics, the schools and students were brought together to share culture with each other. Our Coe guests performed an Afrobeats dance that really got the crowd going.

But throughout the night, there wasn’t only song and dance. Our international peers put on a fashion show displaying the traditional clothing of their homeland, from Japan to Mexico to Egypt. There was also video throughout, taken before the show, of interviews with Cornell students sharing a snippet of the language and their life, both at home and here at Cornell. Hearing all the ways in which different students can say simple phrases, like “hello” and “I love you” is something that truly exemplifies the diversity of backgrounds that exist on our campus.  As the end of the show neared, we saw a special performance from a Cedar Rapids based Mariachi Band who played fan favorites, like “La Bamba.” The ISA closed their annual culture show by bringing the audience up on stage and teaching them a traditional Turkish “Groom Dance.” Everyone on stage, dancing, laughing, and having fun in a space together shows what the culture show is all about. Of course, it is to expose others to cultures from around the world, but ultimately, it is to bring people together, to create a community.

<!-- TODO: sources -->
