---
title: Latinx Restaurant Attacked in Iowa with Nazi Symbols
author: Maria Alejandra Seda Morales
pubDate: Feb 26, 2025
---

The Jíbaro Restaurant, a Puerto Rican restaurant located in Muscatine, Iowa, was attacked on January 26, with swastika symbols and a short, but direct message to the Puerto Rican community: “we dont want you here.” The restaurant, which has an entry door with the Puerto Rican flag painted on it, is known for welcoming customers into a really comfortable and familiar environment, while also offering fresh and homemade-like food. This restaurant has been open for less than a year, but has already created a community within the Muscatine area that only Puerto Ricans are able to create and understand. According to their website pages, “At Jíbaro, authenticity is our cornerstone. Our recipes straight from Puerto Rico, passed down through generations, ensuring that each dish reflects the true flavors of the island,” the restaurant embraces the Puerto Rican culture by making traditional dishes that all of us Puerto Ricans miss while away from home.

According to the owner of Jibaro Restaurant, who’s been living in Iowa since 2007, he’s never suffered an issue similar to this one, but, still, this issue is not a “first time,” or “once in a blue moon” kind of issue. This is an issue that has happened before against Latinx community, people of color communities, and other communities composed by minorities. The day Jibaro Restaurant was defaced, it was not the only restaurant that suffered from attacks. The same day, the owners and customers of “Guadalajara Mexican Restaurant”, a restaurant located next to Jibaro Restaurant, went to enjoy the food, but found swastika symbols on their restaurant walls outside. The restaurant shared a comment on their Facebook page to its community saying, “We were deeply disheartened to discover the recent vandalism to our restaurant and neighboring businesses, an act rooted in hate that does not reflect the values of love, respect, and unity that we hold dear,” this restaurant is built out of Latinx values, and the love of the community is stronger than the hatred by society.

Jíbaro Restaurant also commented in their Facebook account, “Jibaro went through this unpleasant experience where someone wrote a threatening message and damaged our walls and mutilated the paint with our flag,” sharing the torment that the restaurant endured that day with their community. This message got to up to 1,000 people, and even the news media, from both the United States and Puerto Rico. Paola Torres de Jesus ‘28, a Cornell College Puerto Rican student, who is also part of the Puerto Rico Posse 2 program on the school, expressed how she, “felt afraid and scared,” uncertain what an attack like this means for a Puerto Rican student residing and studying in Iowa, and the risks that this may present for us. Torres also commented, “how impotent and helpless I feel is out of words. Just imagining how the owners may have put so much effort into building this place with love and dedication, just for someone to disrespect and invalidate our presence, is something that leaves me fearful for what this may represent for us as Latinx minorities.”

Puerto Ricans have been going through various concerning events this last year. A woman burned down multiple businesses in Cabo Rojo, one of the most touristic places with bars and beautiful beaches of the island. A U.S. Puerto Rican veteran was detained by ICE in a restaurant in Newmark, New Jersey, after “some complaints,” asking for documentation of the workers without an issued warrant, and arrested multiple individuals. Colonialism has tried to steal and tear apart our identities.

Why is our flag so important to Puerto Ricans? And why is it so important that the door with the Puerto Rican flag was vandalized? According to “Gag Law” 53 of 1948, Puerto Ricans were not allowed to raise our flag, by law, until 1957, and this act is just a reminder of open wounds. The mayor of the City of Muscatine, Brad Bark said, "this is not Muscatine, we don't condone this, and shame on you for doing such a horrific act,” in support of these affected communities, sending a message to the responsible. Camila Vázquez Marrero ‘28, who is also a Posse Puerto Rico 2 scholar, shares how, “impactful it is to witness acts committed out of hate and disregard against communities that only intend to share their culture and look for a better life.” Vazquez also commented on how, “unbelievable it is to see that people still follow these extremist beliefs and ideologies.” Still, Vazquez shared that there is something positive that she took out of this terrible incident, and that is that, “thanks to the spreading of this news, us Puerto Rican students, including my Posse, were able to find out there’s actually a place close to college with our cultural food. Now, my Posse is planning to see if we can go one day together to visit, show our support, and of course, eat a good plate of our traditional food. I believe this is one place where I can go now to enjoy a little piece of my “islita” whenever I miss it.” Camila, together with her Posse, including Paola, are now planning a visit to the Jibarito Restaurant, hopefully soon. 

Alisa Rilla Nicolas Staat, the woman that drew swastikas was caught, and received 14 criminal charges. Still, with the changes happening in the United States, our communities are not safe, and our war against discrimination and fight for survival still persist.
