---
title: '"Marvel Rivals" and its Future in Cornell Esports'
author: Austin Palm
pubDate: Apr 26, 2025
---
Saturday, February 22nd, Cornell Esports teams participated in their first tournament for a game brand new to the program: “Marvel Rivals.” During a break in the bracket, I had the opportunity to interview the captains of the Junior Varsity and Varsity teams about the future of the game in the coming year for Cornell Esports.

The captain of the Varsity team, Kyle Neumann, was excited to be participating in the tournament. At the time, they had just finished a match against Coe with a staggering 3-0 victory. Despite the novelty of the team, it was a strong combination of players who shared the spotlight throughout their games. Even though they hadn’t had much time to practice as a team, each member of the Varsity crew was individually capable, with their only pitfall at the time being communication. As a graduating senior, Kyle is excited to play a fresh game for the team after being the captain of our “Rocket League” team for all four of his years at Cornell. Even though he’ll be leaving Cornell this year, he still plans to play with active players and see how the “Rivals” team will grow as it becomes officially sponsored by Cornell Esports and the leagues in which it participates. On top of the high turnout of students interested in joining the new team, Kyle also expressed hope that more games would be livestreamed in the coming year, and that parents of Esports players would be able to understand the gameplay on display through the familiar roster of Marvel characters.

The JV captain, Stella Schmidt, had just taken an unfortunate loss in her last match before I spoke with her, but she had confidence in pushing herself and her team to the finals through the loser’s bracket. She spoke on the similarities between “Rivals” and “Overwatch,” but has high expectations for the former moving forward as the developers have been making healthy changes to the game after its initial burst of popularity when it launched last December. She currently leads our “Rainbow Six: Siege” team, but is having fun with “Rivals” and enjoying getting to play with members of other Esports teams who got to participate in the tournament. She’s expecting the JV team to grow significantly in the coming year as the game joins our official roster and more and more students seek to play in a competitive setting and polish their skills. She encourages students to join any Esports team they may be interested in. Stella claims, “All of the coaches, captains, and team members are willing to help you improve if you’re willing to put in the time and the passion.”
