---
title: Solidarity Will Reign
author: Rhye Nelson
pubDate: Nov 19, 2025
heroImage: "../../../images/articles/2025/solidarity-will-reign-no-kings-rhye.jpeg"
heroImageCaption: "No Kings Protesters - 10/18/25, Bartlett, IL"
heroImageCredit: "Rhye Nelson"
---
On October 18, 2025, the second global No Kings protest took place at over 2,500 locations around the United States and the world. Millions of people across the country gathered to protest the current Trump administration, the increase of austerity, and domestic fascism. Organizers estimate that roughly 7 million people showed up to the Saturday rallies. While massive protest marches and rallies took place in some of the biggest cities in the United States, thousands of small towns held their own protests making this the largest protest in US history. Out of the millions of protesters that showed up, all protests were peaceful and almost no arrests were made across the entire country.

The government shutdown reached the longest it has ever been in US history—43 days since it started on October 1, 2025. The central cause was the Republican House budget would cut approximately $880 billion to Medicaid and affordable healthcare. While states have varying names for Medicaid, healthcare under the Affordable Care Act will experience significant budget cuts. The Democrats had demands to ensure that Medicaid cuts wouldn’t happen. While the Democrats originally withheld agreeing to the government budget because of the cuts to Medicaid, eight Democrats (who are retiring or not up for reelection in the coming years) sided with the Republicans to end the government shutdown and agreed to the budget. In doing so, the Democrats did not secure the provisions to keep healthcare costs low through government subsidies.Once the budget is approved, healthcare costs are poised to skyrocket for many Americans—the majority of whom are lower income. As of June 2025, over 77.7 million Americans were enrolled in Medicaid and Children’s Health Insurance Programs (CHIP). Although food stamps like Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) benefits have resumed, many individuals are feeling the impacts of their temporary loss. Nearly 42 million Americans lost their food stamp benefits during the shut down. While the cost of living continues to exponentially grow, many US citizens are increasingly frustrated as the US funded genocide of Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank has passed its second year. US funding for military and defense takes an increasing percentage of the government’s budget. Additionally, military mobilization in various cities continues, against the wishes of the cities’ governing bodies and residents. Many people are fed up and tired with the administration.

While many big cities tend to have more liberal or left leaning populations, protests in small towns erupted all round rural or suburban areas where populations might lean conservative. Within some suburban towns in Illinois— tending toward a more conservative population—thousands left their homes to stand at an intersection with signs and costumes, calling for the end of Trump’s regime at the No Kings rallies and protests. While some individuals just held signs or brought their voices, some dressed in inflatable frog costumes to show solidarity with a man who wore a frog suit to an anti-ICE rally in Portland, Oregon. At the Portland protest, a law enforcement officer proceeded to spray chemicals into the air valve of the costume.

Based on local elections and polling, the general public isn’t happy with the current administration. Instead, local elections have reflected a turn towards leftist policies and politics. It isn’t just large cities seeing violent ICE raids of neighbors and friends; many small towns have started to see marginalized groups be targeted and kidnapped. Locally, protesters have stood outside of a Cedar Rapids ICE facility as families and individuals enter the building for their check-ins. Some individuals, going for their scheduled check-ins, exit after a half an hour or less. Meanwhile, others might only leave by themselves when they went in with their family. With protestors outside of these facilities, ICE tends to detain less individuals.

In Mount Vernon, dozens showed up to join the No Kings protests on October 18, making it very clear that there would continue to be opposition in regards to the current administration. As solidarity protests show up across the country in both organized and unorganized fashions, the calls for change grow louder from both the Republican and the Democrat constituents. While there is no official protest upcoming from the 50501 Movement, who organizes No Kings protests, emergency protests continue to erupt across the country daily.
