---
title: What is the Freedom Flotilla?
author: Rhye Nelson
pubDate: Oct 15, 2025
---

For over 15 years, the Freedom Flotilla Coalition has set out for one goal, deliver humanitarian aid to the Palestinian people of Gaza and break the siege. The flotillas carry small groups of organuized and unorganzed humanitarian workers and activists in small boats. These groups peacefully try to deliver aid to “the world’s largest open-air prison” (United Nations). Since 2007, Israel has maintained strict control over Gazan airspace and water access while also restricting the movements of goods and people in and out of the Strip. Since 2001, Gaza has had no functioning airports as the Yasser Arafat international airport was bombed three years after it opened (Al Jazeera). In 2008, two boats from the Free Gaza Movement successfully broke the Israeli blockade and made it to Gaza. From 2008 to 2016, 31 flotillas were launched despite heavy Israeli restrictions. Five of these flotillas were successful.

In 2010, six international Non-Governmental Organizations gathered together to bring more than 600 humanitarian aid workers, journalists, activists, and politicians from roughly 40 different countries. The lead ship of the flotilla vessels was the *Mavi Marmara*, carrying humanitarian aid like baby incubators, food, and medicine to break the illegal siege (according to the international law of the United Nations) on the Gaza Strip. At 4 a.m. on May 31, 2010 in international waters, Israeli military on helicopters and speedboats attacked the people aboard the *Mavi Marmara*. Eight Turkish volunteers and one American-Turkish volunteer of the flotilla were shot and killed. Another Turkish flotilla volunteer later succumbed to his injuries but, dozens more were wounded. Many of the aid volunteers were illegally detained and held in inhumane conditions.

Since 2010, all flotillas attempting to break the Gaza siege have been intercepted or attacked by the IOF (Israeli Offensive/Occupation Forces) in international waters. Despite this, for the next 15 years, there have been numerous attempts to send aid and break the illegal siege on Gaza.

Recently, there has been an uptick in flotillas sent to break the blockade. On May 2, 2025, another flotilla, “Break the Siege,” set out on their mission to reach Gaza. However, one of the ships, the *Conscience*, was attacked twice by drones in international waters near Malta, injuring four volunteers. Nearly a month later, the *Madleen* launched. It carried baby formula, medicine, food, and other supplies. On June 9, 2025 Israeli forces illegally seized the *Madleen* in international waters and abducted the 12 activists on board including Swedish activist, Greta Thunberg; Brazilian activist, Thiago Avila; French-Palestinian member of European Parliament, Rima Hassan; and French journalist for Al Jazeera, Omar Faiad. The other activists include Yasemin Acar (Germany), Baptiste Andre (France), Pascal Maurieras (France), Yanis Mhamdi (France), Suayb Ordu (Turkiye), Sergio Toribio (Spain), Marco van Rennes (Netherlands), and Reva Viard (France). After being abducted, the activists were deported within a week of being in prison with two activists placed in solitary confinement. Roughly a month later, on July 13, 2025, the *Handala* departed from Italy with its group of 21 activists, medics, lawyers, journalists, and humanitarian supplies. These activists included Chris Smalls, president and co-founder of the Amazon Labor Union from the United States, and Mohammed Mustafa, a medical doctor who volunteered in Gaza. On July 26, 2025, the *Handala* was illegally intercepted in international waters and everyone on board was abducted. Those abducted reported mistreatment in Israeli prisons, including physical assaults and poor hygienic conditions. Chris Smalls was reportedly targeted by IOF soldiers where he was choked and kicked. After five days of unlawful detention, the final two volunteers were deported, Chris Smalls and Hatem Aouini.

Two years into the genocide of the Palestinian people and over 77 years of the illegal occupation of Palestinian land, the most recent attempt to break Israel’s siege and deliberate starvation of the people in Gaza was the Global Sumud Flotilla. This flotilla gathered over 500 people from 44 countries to embark on over 40 vessels to break the siege. Among the activists, Greta Thunberg, Thiago Avila, Ada Colau (former mayor of Barcelona), and Mandla Mandela (grandson of Nelson Mandela) were a part of the flotilla. In violation of international and maritime law, several ships were bombed by Israeli troops off the coast of Tunisia and once again off the coast of Crete, but the crews continued on. Spain, Italy, Greece, and Turkiye sent naval ships to the Mediterranean Sea to protect the Global Sumud Flotilla. However, Italy’s ships tried to reroute the flotilla and all countries’ naval ships turned away as the flotilla grew closer to Occupied Palestine. Between October 1-3, all 42 boats of the Global Sumud Flotilla were illegally intercepted in international waters and all participants were illegally detained. While detained, activists reported mistreatment and torture of the hundreds of people illegally abducted by Israel.

Upon her release, Greta Thunberg recentered the focus of the mission back on to the Palestinians in Gaza who are being starved and massacred by Israel. She stated, “I can talk for a very long time about our mistreatment and the abuses we faced in prison, trust me, but that is not the story. […] Let me be very clear, there is a genocide going on in front of our very eyes. A live-streamed genocide on all of our phones. No one has the privilege to say we are not aware of what is happening. No one in the future will be able to say we did not know.”

As of October 8, 2025, yet another flotilla carrying roughly over $110,000 in medicine, medical equipment, and nutritional supplies that were intended to go to Gaza’s starving hospitals were illegally intercepted by Israel along with 145 activists, doctors, journalists, and politicians who were abducted.
